//frailty AND "chronic renal disease" 
//("frailty"[MeSH Terms] OR "frailty"[All Fields]) AND "chronic renal disease"[All Fields]
==============================================================================================
1. Aortic Valve Replacement.

Rajput FA(1), Zeltser R(2).
In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2018-.
2019 Jan 29.

Author information: 
(1)University of Wisconsin - Madison
(2)Hofstra Northwell School of Medicine

The aortic valve is a semilunar valve with three leaflets, which lies at the
junction of left ventricle and aorta. It allows unidirectional blood flow from
the left ventricle to the aorta and the rest of the body. Because of the highly
complex and sophisticated cellular and molecular functions, the thin valve
leaflet can withstand extreme mechanical and hemodynamic forces with every
cardiac cycle.[1] Various factors including age and congenital defects can
compromise the normal valvular function leading to a wide variety of
complications.[2] Although bicuspid aortic valves (BAV) are the most common
congenital abnormality, congenital valve defects can range from aortic atresia
(missing or incomplete closure of aortic valves) to a sub or supra-valvular
stenosis. BAV is reported to have an incidence of 1 to 2% with a male
predominance. Lack of microfibrillar proteins during valvulogenesis has been
reported to affect the leaflet development where two leaflets are fused to form
one large leaflet. It frequently correlates with aortic abnormalities such as
aortic dilation (root, ascending and arch) and coarctation of the aorta.[3] The
bicuspid aortic valve leaflets can undergo accelerated calcific degeneration
because of abnormal hemodynamic forces. Congenital abnormalities including BAV
can lead to various valvular complications including aortic stenosis and aortic
regurgitation leading to an increased risk to infective endocarditis, which has a
reported incidence of 12 to 39% in BAV.[3] Unless severe, BAV generally remains
asymptomatic till the age of 50 to 60 years. Aortic stenosis (AS) is a narrowing 
of the valve aperture reducing the aortic valve area. Increased resistance to
blood flow and transvalvular pressure gradient causes increased left ventricle
workload causing hypertrophy. Its prevalence increases with age and can be as
high as 4.6% in people greater than age 75 years. Being the most common valvular 
disease in Europe and America, estimates are that 3.5 million people in England
alone will have AS by the year 2020.[4] Calcific degeneration leading to
stiffening and restriction motion of valve leaflet is the most common cause of
AS. Disruption of endothelium lining on the aortic side caused by increased
mechanical stress seem to be the inciting event. Posterior leaflets are
reported to be affected the most.[5] Rheumatic fever causing inflammation of the 
leaflets is still the leading cause of AS in developing countries. AS can be
asymptomatic or can cause symptoms of syncope, angina and heart
failure.[6] Severe AS is fatal with a 50% mortality at 2 years.[7] As per The
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association (ACC/AHA) guidelines,
AS is graded severe when the orifice area is less than 1.0 cm, the mean gradient 
is greater than 40 mmHg or the jet velocity is greater than 4 m/s. Prognosis is
poor in symptomatic or severe cases unless the valve is replaced. Up to 30% of
patients aged > 75 do not undergo surgical valve replacement either because of
technical reasons; this may include porcelain aorta, general frailty, refusal to 
undergo surgery, and serious comorbid conditions.[8] The operative death risk for
surgical aortic valve replacement (SAVR) is as high as 10% in patients with LV
dysfunction, chronic renal disease, and advanced age.[9] Trans-catheter aortic
valve replacement and trans-catheter aortic valve implantation (TAVR/TAVI) have
emerged as a more feasible and less risky option for patients not suitable for
surgery. Aortic regurgitation (AR) is the backflow of blood from the aorta to the
left ventricle when the valve leaflets fail to coapt. Common causes include
congenital defects, calcific degeneration, infective endocarditis, rheumatic
fever, and trauma.[10][11][12][13] Ventricular hypertrophy in chronic cases
accommodates increased volume to maintain the normal stroke volume and
end-diastolic pressure; hence, chronic AR can be asymptomatic for decades.[14] In
contrast, with acute cases of AR, ventricles do not have enough time to undergo
the needed changes such as hypertrophy to accommodate increased volumes. Because 
of decreased stroke volume, the heart rate increases to maintain cardiac output
but is insufficient to meet the demand resulting in increased left atrial
pressure, pulmonary edema and cardiogenic shock. On physical examination, AR
murmur is blowing, high-pitched, diastolic, and decrescendo, beginning soon after
the aortic component of S (A); it is loudest at the 3rd or 4th left parasternal
intercostal space. It also has associations with various other murmurs including:
“Mid-systolic murmur” because of rapid ejection of an overload of blood from the 
left ventricle, “Austin Flint” murmur is mid-to-late diastolic murmur due
to partial closure of mitral valve during ventricular systole because of
regurgitant flow from aortic valve, “Cole-Cecil” is a diastolic murmur due to the
fusion of an aortic murmur with the S3 because of simultaneous filling of the
left ventricle from left atrium and AR. History of valvular surgery Dr. Theodore 
Tuffier, in 1912, used his finger to free the fused leaflets of a stenosed aortic
valve.[15] Before the advent of cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB), mitral valve repair
involved commissurotomy through access from the left atrial chamber. Thomas Homes
Sellors performed first pulmonary valvulotomy in 1948 by using a tenotomy
knife.[16] Charles Hufnagel developed the first artificial valve based on a
reciprocating ball and cage. It was used to prevent backflow of blood into the
ventricles due to aortic insufficiency.[17] CPB machine revolutionized the valve 
replacement in the anatomical position. Dr. Dwight Harken and his colleagues
performed the first successful aortic valve replacement. Later that year, Drs.
Albert Starr and Lowell Edwards performed mitral valve replacement.[18]
Bioprosthetic valves are closer in function to natural valves but have a limited 
life expectancy, whereas, Mechanical valves are more durable but require
anticoagulation. The choice of valves, among other factors, depends upon the
patient’s age and well-being. Mechanical heart valves are known to last for
approximately 25 years. Seventy different mechanical heart valves have been
developed since 1960.[19] Ball and cage, bi-leaflet, and tilting disc are the
common ones. Modification of the ball valve by Dr. Albert Starr and Lowell
Edwards entailed developing a cage made of lucite with a silicone elastomer ball.
The cage material was later changed to stainless steel and then cobalt-chromium
alloys. The Starr-Edward valve also has a Teflon sewing ring, which enabled
suturing into mitral and later into the aortic position.[20]  Increased
thrombogenicity has been a significant issue, for which valves underwent several 
modifications such as measures to reduce metal contact by covering the struts
with cloth and using Silastic shields. Other issues included hemolysis due to
excessive rubbing of the ball against the sewing ring and occlusion of coronary
ostia because of high profile. Despite these issues, these valves showed the
feasibility of prosthetic valve enabling Starr-Edwards to draw design criteria.
Basic points included that the valves should be chemically inert, biocompatible, 
a-traumatic to blood, and non-thrombogenic.[21]  In 1965, Kay-Shiley’s
non-rotating disc valve replaced the ball with a single disc but demonstrated
poor hemodynamics and hemolysis and was discontinued. Bjork-Shiley in 1969
developed a tilting-disc valve, which overcame the problems with the single-disc 
valve. Free rotation of disc between metal struts allows it to open by tilting at
a 60-degree angle. Bjork-Shiley replaced the flat with the convexo-concave disc
to create a larger orifice in 1975 but were the object of a recall due to
fracture of welded struts.[22]  Medtronic Hall valve developed by Dr. Karl Hall
and Robert Kaster is the most common tilting disc valve. Perforation in the
middle of the disc served as a guide and an improved tilting angle.[23] In 1977, 
St Jude Medical developed Bi-leaflet valve, which comprised two semi-circular
flaps with hinges close to the center of the orifice. Stagnation of blood flow
leading to thrombus formation around the hinge region was a problem with the
bi-leaflet valve.[15] A newly developed valve resolved this issue with a valve in
which the continuous 360-degree rotation around the central axis of the valve
ensured an even distribution of blood flow and prevent thrombus formation.[16] 
Predisposition for thrombosis, embolism, need for lifelong anticoagulation
therapy are drawbacks of mechanical valves. Bioprosthetic valves can either be an
allograft (cadaver or Ross procedure) or, a xenograft (native or pericardium).
The Ross procedure involves replacing the diseased aortic valve with the
patient’s own pulmonary valve (autograft) and replace the pulmonary valve with
aortic or pulmonary allograft. The pulmonary autograft grows with the patient and
does not induce an immunologic response. The most common xenografts are porcine
aortic valves and bovine pericardial valves. Lonescu-Shiley developed xenograft
valves by using bovine pericardium on a titanium stent in 1971 but was later
withdrawn in 1987 due to structural failure including abrasive tears because of
fabric-tissue interface and leaflet calcification. Carpentier-Edwards bovine
pericardial valve overcame those issues by making some structural modifications, 
like stitching pericardium to the inside of the fabric and using flexible stent
posts. Although biological valves have better hemodynamics compared to mechanical
valves, they have a shorter lifespan because of calcification, which stiffens the
valve leaflets. Tissues engineering, a field in regenerative medicine restores
and maintains the function of living tissues. Skin graft for burn victims is an
example. Tissue engineered heart valves (TEHV) are perceived to be
non-thrombogenic, and infection resistant. With advancement in material science
and culturing techniques, there is the possibility of a TEHV valve that
is capable of growing, remodeling and repairing itself as the patients grow.
Polymeric valves have been around for over 50 years, but because the earlier
versions were prone to calcification and degradation, they were not widely used
and instead only used in bridge devices like artificial hearts and left
ventricular assist devices. Besides the advantage that they can be produced in
various shapes and sizes,[17] they are known to combine the durability of
mechanical valves and the hydrodynamic function of bioprosthetic valves.[18] The 
earliest polymeric valve implanted in a 44-year-old female in 1958 at the mitral 
position was a polyurethane design with Teflon chordae
tendinae.[18][18][24] Polyurethane valves have been found to have better
hemodynamics compared to bioprosthetic valves and a lower incidence of
thrombogenicity than mechanical valves. With advances in material sciences, the
future of polymeric valves seems promising.

PMID: 30725821 


2. JACC Heart Fail. 2018 Sep;6(9):771-779. doi: 10.1016/j.jchf.2018.03.016. Epub
2018 Aug 8.

A Bayesian Model to Predict Survival After Left Ventricular Assist Device
Implantation.

Kanwar MK(1), Lohmueller LC(2), Kormos RL(3), Teuteberg JJ(4), Rogers JG(5),
Lindenfeld J(6), Bailey SH(7), McIlvennan CK(8), Benza R(7), Murali S(7), Antaki 
J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Institute, Allegheny Health Network, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. 
Electronic address: Manreet.kanwar@ahn.org.
(2)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania.
(3)Heart and Vascular Institute, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(4)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Stanford University Medical Center,
Stanford, California.
(5)Division of Cardiology, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, North
Carolina.
(6)Cardiovascular Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
Tennessee.
(7)Cardiovascular Institute, Allegheny Health Network, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(8)Cardiovascular Institute, University of Colorado, Aurora, Colorado.

OBJECTIVES: This study investigates the use of a Bayesian statistical models to
predict survival at various time points in patients undergoing left ventricular
assist device (LVAD) implantation.
BACKGROUND: LVADs are being increasingly used in patients with end-stage heart
failure. Appropriate patient selection continues to be key in optimizing
post-LVAD outcomes.
METHODS: Data used for this study were derived from 10,277 adult patients from
the INTERMACS (Inter-Agency Registry for Mechanically Assisted Circulatory
Support) who had a primary LVAD implanted between January 2012 and December 2015.
Risk for mortality was calculated retrospectively for various time points (1, 3, 
and 12 months) after LVAD implantation, using multiple pre-implantation
variables. For each of these endpoints, a separate tree-augmented naïve Bayes
model was constructed using the most predictive variables.
RESULTS: A set of 29, 26, and 31 pre-LVAD variables were found to be predictive
at 1, 3, and 12 months, respectively. Predictors of 1-month mortality included
low Inter-Agency Registry for Mechanically Assisted Circulatory Support profile, 
number of acute events in the 48 h before surgery, temporary mechanical
circulatory support, and renal and hepatic dysfunction. Variables predicting
12-month mortality included advanced age, frailty, device strategy, and chronic
renal disease. The accuracy of all Bayesian models was between 76% and 87%, with 
an area under the receiver operative characteristics curve of between 0.70 and
0.71.
CONCLUSIONS: A Bayesian prognostic model for predicting survival based on the
comprehensive INTERMACS registry provided highly accurate predictions of
mortality based on pre-operative variables. These models may facilitate clinical 
decision-making while screening candidates for LVAD therapy.

Copyright © 2018 American College of Cardiology Foundation. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jchf.2018.03.016 
PMCID: PMC6119115 [Available on 2019-09-01]
PMID: 30098967 


3. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2018 Aug;37(8):1013-1020. doi:
10.1016/j.healun.2018.04.006. Epub 2018 Apr 25.

Bloodstream infections in mechanical circulatory support device recipients in the
International Society of Heart and Lung Transplantation Mechanically Assisted
Circulation Support Registry: Epidemiology, risk factors, and mortality.

Aslam S(1), Xie R(2), Cowger J(3), Kirklin JK(4), Chu VH(5), Schueler S(6), de By
T(7), Gould K(8), Morrissey O(9), Lund LH(10), Martin S(11), Goldstein D(12),
Hannan M(13).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla, California. Electronic address: saslam@ucsd.edu.
(2)James and John Kirklin Institute for Research in Surgical Outcomes (KIRSO),
Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Department of Surgery, The University of
Alabama at Birmingham, Alabama.
(3)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Henry Ford Hospitals, Detroit, Michigan.
(4)Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery. Director, Kirklin Institute for Research
in Surgical Outcomes (KIRSO), Department of Surgery, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Alabama.
(5)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina.
(6)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Newcastle Hospitals NHS Foundation
Trust, Newcastle, United Kingdom.
(7)QUIP Project Manager, EUROMACS Managing Director, EUROMACS, Berlin, Germany.
(8)Department of Microbiology, Newcastle Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust,
Newcastle, United Kingdom.
(9)Department of Infectious Diseases, Alfred Health, Melbourne, Australia.
(10)Unit of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden.
(11)Division of Infectious Diseases. Geisinger Health System, Danville,
Pennsylvania.
(12)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Montefiore Medical Center, New York,
New York.
(13)Division of Infectious Diseases, Mater Miscordiae University Hospital,
Dublin, Ireland.

BACKGROUND: We used multicenter international data from the International Society
of Heart and Lung Transplantation Mechanically Assisted Circulation Support
(IMACS) registry to determine bloodstream infection (BSI) event rate, independent
risk factors, and association with mortality.
METHODS: Included were patients registered in IMACS from January 2013 through
December 2015, assessed BSI event rate of mechanical circulatory support (MCS)
and non-MCS-related BSIs, and conducted univariate and multivariate analyses
between BSI with baseline characteristics and mortality.
RESULTS: We documented 1,606 BSIs in 1,231 of 10,171 MCS recipients (12%), with
an event rate of 2.43 BSIs/100 patient-months within 3 months after implant
(early onset) and 1.03 BSIs/100 patient-months after 3 months (late onset). Of
these episodes, 1,378 (85.8%) were non- MCS-related BSI. Increasing body mass
index and bilirubin were independent correlates of MCS-related BSI. Independent
correlates of non-MCS-related BSI included older age, higher body mass index,
previous cardiac surgery, baseline chronic renal disease and dialysis,
pre-implant frailty, presence of biventricular assist device, total artificial
heart or right ventricular assist device, and Interagency Registry for
Mechanically Assisted Circulatory Support category 1. Survival after 3 months
after implant of patients who developed early-onset BSI was 56.9% at 24 months vs
77.4% in patients without early-onset BSI (p < 0.001). Early-onset BSI was an
independent correlate of mortality at 3 months after implantation (hazard ratio, 
2.56; 95% confidence interval, 2.09-3.15; p < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Early-onset BSI was associated with significantly increased 24-month
mortality. More than 85% of these BSIs were not device related. There is an
opportunity for infection prevention practices to decrease the BSI event rate,
which may affect 24-month survival. These data can also serve as benchmarking for
individual institutions.

Copyright © 2018 International Society for the Heart and Lung Transplantation.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.healun.2018.04.006 
PMID: 29936085 


4. Z Gerontol Geriatr. 2016 Aug;49(6):469-76. doi: 10.1007/s00391-016-1109-y. Epub
2016 Jul 25.

[Decline in renal function in old age : Part of physiological aging versus
age-related disease].

[Article in German]

Braun F(1), Brinkkötter PT(2).

Author information: 
(1)Klinik II für Innere Medizin: Nephrologie, Rheumatologie, Diabetologie und
Allgemeine Innere Medizin, Uniklinik Köln, Kerpener Str. 62, Köln, 50937,
Deutschland.
(2)Klinik II für Innere Medizin: Nephrologie, Rheumatologie, Diabetologie und
Allgemeine Innere Medizin, Uniklinik Köln, Kerpener Str. 62, Köln, 50937,
Deutschland. paul.brinkkoetter@uk-koeln.de.

The incidence and prevalence of chronic renal disease (CKD) in elderly patients
are continuously increasing worldwide. Loss of renal function is not only
considered to be part of the aging process itself but also reflects the
multimorbidity of many geriatric patients. Calculating the glomerular filtration 
rate using specific algorithms validated for the elderly population and measuring
the amount of proteinuria allow an estimation of renal function in elderly
patients with high accuracy. Chronic renal failure has many clinical consequences
and not only results in a delayed excretion of toxins cleared by the kidneys but 
also affects hematogenesis, water and electrolyte balance as well as mineral bone
metabolism. Furthermore, CKD directly leads to and aggravates geriatric syndromes
and in particular the onset of frailty. Therapeutic strategies to halt
progression of CKD not only comprise treatment of the underlying disease but also
efficient blood pressure and diabetic control and the avoidance of nephrotoxic
medications.

DOI: 10.1007/s00391-016-1109-y 
PMID: 27457360  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Int Urol Nephrol. 2015 Apr;47(4):647-54. doi: 10.1007/s11255-014-0886-8. Epub
2014 Dec 5.

Therapeutic alternatives and palliative care for advanced renal disease in the
very elderly: a review of the literature.

Musso CG(1), Trigka K, Dousdampanis P, Jauregui J.

Author information: 
(1)Ageing Biology Unit, Hospital Italiano de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires,
Argentina, carlos.musso@hospitalitaliano.org.ar.

The overall number of very elderly patients (>79 years of age) requiring renal
replacement therapy is rising in the Western societies, with a choice for
managing advanced chronic renal disease among hemodialysis, peritoneal dialysis, 
kidney transplant, conservative, or palliative care. The selection of the most
adequate alternatives should be tailored to meet individual needs, considering
variables such as patient's choice, clinical status, and social context, analyzed
from a geriatric perspective, aiming not only to prolong patient's life
expectancy, but also to improve the patient's quality of life. Frailty and
sarcopenia are highly prevalent comorbidities found in very elderly population,
particularly in the end-stage chronic renal disease population. Both
comorbidities have a strong negative impact on health general status, and
specific treatment should be provided in conjunction with the selected management
for renal replacement, except when a palliative care has been implemented.
Moreover, the detected degree of frailty in a renal patient can have an important
influence on the decision about which modality of renal replacement treatment
will be selected. All these alternatives and considerations are discussed in the 
present review article.

DOI: 10.1007/s11255-014-0886-8 
PMID: 25475195  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. NPJ Prim Care Respir Med. 2014 Jun 12;24:14008. doi: 10.1038/npjpcrm.2014.8.

The prevalence of COPD co-morbidities in Serbia: results of a national survey.

Nagorni-Obradovic LM(1), Vukovic DS(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Faculty of Medicine, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia [2] Clinic
for Pulmonology, Clinical Centre of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Social Medicine, Centre School of Public
Health, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia.

BACKGROUND: Research studies have found different prevalence rates for
co-morbidities in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
AIMS: The aim of our study was to investigate the prevalence of co-morbidities as
well as functional limitations in subjects with COPD.
METHODS: The study was based on a nationally representative sample of the
population of Serbia. Information on the health of the population was obtained
from interviews and anthropometric measurements. In this study we analysed a
total of 10,013 respondents aged 40 years or older. There were 653 subjects with 
COPD and 9,360 respondents without COPD.
RESULTS: Out of the 10,013 respondents, 5,377 were aged 40-59 years and 4,636
were 60 years or older. The prevalence of COPD was 5.0% in respondents aged 40-59
years and 8.3% in those aged 60 years or older; the total prevalence was 6.5%.
The most prevalent co-morbidities among respondents with COPD were hypertension
(54.5%) and dyslipidaemia (26.5%). The prevalence of all analysed co-morbidities 
was higher in respondents with COPD and the difference was highly statistically
significant, except for stroke and malignancies, for which the difference was
significant. Analysis showed that respondents with COPD had a higher prevalence
of all analysed clinical factors (dizziness, obesity, anaemia and frailty) and
functional impairments (mobility and hearing and visual impairment) compared with
respondents without COPD. For those aged 40-59 years the difference was highest
for mobility difficulty (four times higher prevalence in COPD patients) and
anaemia (three times higher in COPD patients).
CONCLUSION: Our analysis showed that the most prevalent co-morbidities in COPD
were hypertension, dyslipidaemia, chronic renal disease and anxiety/depression.
The finding suggests that health professionals should actively assess
co-morbidities in patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.1038/npjpcrm.2014.8 
PMCID: PMC4373300
PMID: 24921714  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. BMC Nephrol. 2011 Nov 17;12:63. doi: 10.1186/1471-2369-12-63.

Duration of temporary catheter use for hemodialysis: an observational,
prospective evaluation of renal units in Brazil.

Bonfante GM(1), Gomes IC, Andrade EI, Lima EM, Acurcio FA, Cherchiglia ML.

Author information: 
(1)Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Brazil.
gimacedosilva@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: For chronic hemodialysis, the ideal permanent vascular access is the 
arteriovenous fistula (AVF). Temporary catheters should be reserved for acute
dialysis needs. The AVF is associated with lower infection rates, better clinical
results, and a higher quality of life and survival when compared to temporary
catheters. In Brazil, the proportion of patients with temporary catheters for
more than 3 months from the beginning of therapy is used as an evaluation of the 
quality of renal units. The aim of this study is to evaluate factors associated
with the time between the beginning of hemodialysis with temporary catheters and 
the placement of the first arteriovenous fistula in Brazil.
METHODS: This is an observational, prospective non-concurrent study using
national administrative registries of all patients financed by the public health 
system who began renal replacement therapy (RRT) between 2000 and 2004 in Brazil.
Incident patients were eligible who had hemodialysis for the first time. Patients
were excluded who: had hemodialysis reportedly started after the date of death
(inconsistent database); were younger than 18 years old; had HIV; had no record
of the first dialysis unit; and were dialyzed in units with less than twenty
patients. To evaluate individual and renal unit factors associated with the event
of interest, the frailty model was used (N = 55,589).
RESULTS: Among the 23,824 patients (42.9%) who underwent fistula placement in the
period of the study, 18.2% maintained the temporary catheter for more than three 
months until the fistula creation. The analysis identified five statistically
significant factors associated with longer time until first fistula: higher age
(Hazard-risk - HR 0.99, 95% CI 0.99-1.00); having hypertension and cardiovascular
diseases (HR 0.94, 95% CI 0.9-0.98) as the cause of chronic renal disease;
residing in capitals cities (HR 0.92, 95% CI 0.9-0.95) and certain regions in
Brazil - South (HR 0.83, 95% CI 0.8-0.87), Midwest (HR 0.88, 95% CI 0.83-0.94),
Northeast (HR 0.91, 95% CI 0.88-0.94), or North (HR 0.88, 95% CI 0.83-0.94) and
the type of renal unit (public or private).
CONCLUSION: Monitoring the provision of arteriovenous fistulas in renal units
could improve the care given to patients with end stage renal disease.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2369-12-63 
PMCID: PMC3227575
PMID: 22093280  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
