//frailty AND "renal transplant" AND complications 
//
1. Pharmacol Res. 2018 Apr;130:303-307. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2018.02.031. Epub 2018
Mar 6.

Personalized immunosuppression in elderly renal transplant recipients.

Peeters LEJ(1), Andrews LM(1), Hesselink DA(2), de Winter BCM(1), van Gelder
T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Hospital Pharmacy, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Departments of Internal Medicine, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Departments of Hospital Pharmacy, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center
Rotterdam, The Netherlands; Departments of Internal Medicine, Erasmus MC,
University Medical Center Rotterdam, The Netherlands. Electronic address:
t.vangelder@erasmusmc.nl.

The number of elderly people has increased considerably over the last decades,
due to a rising life expectancy and ageing populations. As a result, an increased
number of elderly with end-stage-renal-disease are diagnosed, for which the
preferred treatment is renal transplantation. Over the past years the awareness
of the elderly as a specific patient population has grown, which increases the
importance of research in this group. Elderly patients often receive kidneys from
elderly donors while younger donor kidneys are preferentially reserved for
younger recipients. Although the rate of acute rejection after transplantation is
lower in the elderly, these rejections may lead to graft loss more frequently, as
kidneys from elderly donors have marginal reserve capacity. To prevent acute
rejection, immunosuppressive therapy is needed. On the other hand, elderly
patients have a higher risk to die from infectious complications, and thus less
immunosuppression would be preferable. Immunosuppressive treatment in the elderly
is complicated further by changes in the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics,
with increasing age. Adjustments in standard immunosuppressive regimes are
therefore suggested for this population. An unmet need in transplantation
medicine is a tool to guide a personalized approach to immunosuppression.
Recently several promising biomarkers that identify injury to the graft at an
early stage or predict acute rejection have been identified. Unfortunately, none 
of these biomarkers were tested specifically in the elderly. We believe there is 
an urgent need to perform clinical trials investigating novel immunosuppressive
regimens in conjunction with biomarker studies in this specific population.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.phrs.2018.02.031 
PMID: 29501679  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
