//frailty AND "renal transplant" 
//("frailty"[MeSH Terms] OR "frailty"[All Fields]) AND "renal transplant"[All Fields]
=========================================================================================
1. J Res Health Sci. 2018 Dec 29;18(4):e00433.

Association between Multiple Recurrent Events with Multivariate Modeling: A
Retrospective Cohort Study.

Osmani F(1), Hajizadeh E(2), Rasekhi A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Tarbiat Modares
University, Tehran, Iran. f.osmani@modares.ac.ir.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Tarbiat Modares
University, Tehran, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Recurrent event data are often encountered in biomedical research,
for example, recurrent infections or recurrent hospitalizations for patients
after renal transplant. In many studies, there are more than one type of events
of interest. We aimed to identify the association between two types of events
using multivariate joint modeling and then apply this statistical method in the
clinical data set.
STUDY DESIGN: A retrospective cohort study.
METHODS: Overall, 342 subjects with breast cancer whose records were registered
for follow-up in a Cancer Research Center at Shohadaye Tajrish Hospital, Tehran, 
Iran from 2006 to 2015 were investigated. These patients were monitored for at
least 6 months after diagnosis and their latest status were recorded. Joint
frailty model was used for modeling the relationship between two types of
recurrences with Frailty package in R software.
RESULTS: When the terminal event was considered as death, three-year and
five-year survival rates for the patients were 0.79 and 0.68, respectively. Given
the results obtained from a fitted joint frailty model, the risk of multiple
recurrences (local and metastases) increased for the patients with tumor grades
greater than I.
CONCLUSION: With regard to the significant variance of the frailty component of
the metastases event, it can be inferred that patients with the same predictive
variables are prone to different levels of metastases risk and, on the other
hand, given the low frequency of types of recurrences, caution should be
exercised when considering the obtained results.


PMID: 30728319 


2. Transplant Proc. 2018 Dec;50(10):3968-3972. doi:
10.1016/j.transproceed.2018.07.002. Epub 2018 Jul 7.

Acute Esophageal Necrosis in an Immunosuppressed Kidney Transplant Recipient: A
Case Report.

Mealiea D(1), Greenhouse D(2), Velez M(3), Moses P(3), Marroquin CE(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Department of Cardiac Surgery, Children's Healthcare of Atlanta, Atlanta, GA.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology, University of Vermont Medical Center,
Burlington, VT.
(4)Department of Transplant and Hepatobiliary Surgery and Immunology, University 
of Vermont Medical Center, Burlington, VT. Electronic address:
Carlos.Marroquin@uvmhealth.org.

Acute esophageal necrosis (AEN) is rare and characterized endoscopically by
distal esophageal ulceration, blackening, and necrosis. It typically arises in
patients with multiple comorbidities who have significant systemic disease and
frailty. Specific precipitating events are variable. Evidence suggests a
multifactorial etiology likely involving esophageal ischemia in the setting of
corrosive injury from gastric contents and impaired tissue repair mechanisms. In 
the transplant setting, immunosuppression likely plays a substantial role. We
report a case of AEN in a 70-year-old man following a renal transplant.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.transproceed.2018.07.002 
PMID: 30577298  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Pharmacol Res. 2018 Apr;130:303-307. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2018.02.031. Epub 2018
Mar 6.

Personalized immunosuppression in elderly renal transplant recipients.

Peeters LEJ(1), Andrews LM(1), Hesselink DA(2), de Winter BCM(1), van Gelder
T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Hospital Pharmacy, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Departments of Internal Medicine, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Departments of Hospital Pharmacy, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center
Rotterdam, The Netherlands; Departments of Internal Medicine, Erasmus MC,
University Medical Center Rotterdam, The Netherlands. Electronic address:
t.vangelder@erasmusmc.nl.

The number of elderly people has increased considerably over the last decades,
due to a rising life expectancy and ageing populations. As a result, an increased
number of elderly with end-stage-renal-disease are diagnosed, for which the
preferred treatment is renal transplantation. Over the past years the awareness
of the elderly as a specific patient population has grown, which increases the
importance of research in this group. Elderly patients often receive kidneys from
elderly donors while younger donor kidneys are preferentially reserved for
younger recipients. Although the rate of acute rejection after transplantation is
lower in the elderly, these rejections may lead to graft loss more frequently, as
kidneys from elderly donors have marginal reserve capacity. To prevent acute
rejection, immunosuppressive therapy is needed. On the other hand, elderly
patients have a higher risk to die from infectious complications, and thus less
immunosuppression would be preferable. Immunosuppressive treatment in the elderly
is complicated further by changes in the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics,
with increasing age. Adjustments in standard immunosuppressive regimes are
therefore suggested for this population. An unmet need in transplantation
medicine is a tool to guide a personalized approach to immunosuppression.
Recently several promising biomarkers that identify injury to the graft at an
early stage or predict acute rejection have been identified. Unfortunately, none 
of these biomarkers were tested specifically in the elderly. We believe there is 
an urgent need to perform clinical trials investigating novel immunosuppressive
regimens in conjunction with biomarker studies in this specific population.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.phrs.2018.02.031 
PMID: 29501679  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Stat Methods Med Res. 2018 Mar;27(3):832-845. doi: 10.1177/0962280216643563. Epub
2016 May 2.

Dynamic prediction of recurrent events data by landmarking with application to a 
follow-up study of patients after kidney transplant.

Musoro JZ(1), Struijk GH(2), Geskus RB(1), Ten Berge I(2), Zwinderman AH(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Clinical Epidemiology, Biostatistics and Bioinformatic
Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(2)2 Renal Transplant Unit, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

This paper extends dynamic prediction by landmarking to recurrent event data. The
motivating data comprised post-kidney transplantation records of repeated
infections and repeated measurements of multiple markers. At each landmark time
point ts, a Cox proportional hazards model with a frailty term was fitted using
data of individuals who were at risk at landmark s. This model included the
time-updated marker values at ts as time-fixed covariates. Based on a stacked
data set that merged all landmark data sets, we considered supermodels that allow
parameters to depend on the landmarks in a smooth fashion. We described and
evaluated four ways to parameterize the supermodels for recurrent event data.
With both the study data and simulated data sets, we compared supermodels that
were fitted on stacked data sets that consisted of either overlapping or
non-overlapping landmark periods. We observed that for recurrent event data, the 
supermodels may yield biased estimates when overlapping landmark periods are used
for stacking. Using the best supermodel amongst the ones considered, we
dynamically estimated the probability to remain infection free between ts and a
prediction horizon thor, conditional on the information available at ts.

DOI: 10.1177/0962280216643563 
PMID: 27142981 


5. Am J Transplant. 2015 Apr;15(4):1050-60. doi: 10.1111/ajt.13095. Epub 2015 Mar
10.

Individual and regional factors of access to the renal transplant waiting list in
france in a cohort of dialyzed patients.

Bayat S(1), Macher MA, Couchoud C, Bayer F, Lassalle M, Villar E, Caillé Y,
Mercier S, Joyeux V, Noel C, Kessler M, Jacquelinet C; REIN registry.

Author information: 
(1)Département d'Epidémiologie-Biostatistiques, EA MOS, EHESP, Rennes, France.

Several studies have investigated geographical variations in access to renal
transplant waiting lists, but none has assessed the impact on these variations of
factors at both the patient and geographic levels. The objective of our study was
to identify medical and non-medical factors at both these levels associated with 
these geographical variations in waiting-list placement in France. We included
all incident patients aged 18-80 years in 11 French regions who started dialysis 
between January 1, 2006, and December 31, 2008. Both a multilevel Cox model with 
shared frailty and a competing risks model were used for the analyses. At the
patient level, old age, comorbidities, diabetic nephropathy, non-autonomous first
dialysis, and female gender were the major determinants of a lower probability of
being waitlisted. At the regional level, the only factor associated with this
probability was an increase in the number of patients on the waiting list from
2005 to 2009. This finding supports a slight but significant impact of a regional
organ shortage on waitlisting practices. Our findings demonstrate that patients' 
age has a major impact on waitlisting practices, even for patients with no
comorbidity or disability, whose survival would likely be improved by
transplantation compared with dialysis.

© Copyright 2015 The American Society of Transplantation and the American Society
of Transplant Surgeons.

DOI: 10.1111/ajt.13095 
PMID: 25758788  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Int J Qual Health Care. 2003 Jun;15(3):189-96.

Survival of hemodialysis patients: modeling differences in risk of dialysis
centers.

Sá Carvalho M(1), Henderson R, Shimakura S, Sousa IP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Lancaster University, Lancaster, UK.
carvalho@procc.fiocruz.br

OBJECTIVE: Dialysis is the most common renal replacement therapy for patients
with end stage renal disease. This paper considers survival of dialysis patients,
aiming to assess quality of renal replacement therapy at dialysis centers in Rio 
de Janeiro, Brazil, and to investigate differences in survival between health
facilities.
METHODS: A Cox proportional hazards model, allowing for time-varying covariates
and prevalent data, was the basic method used to analyze the survival of 11,579
patients on hemodialysis in 67 health facilities in Rio de Janeiro State from
January 1998 until August 2001, using data obtained from routine information
systems. A frailty random effects model was applied to investigate differences in
mortality between health centers not explained by measured characteristics.
RESULTS: The individual variables associated with the outcome were age and
underlying disease, with diabetes being the main isolated risk factor.
Considering covariates of the health unit, two factors were associated with
performance: bigger units had on average better survival times than smaller ones 
and units which offered cyclic peritoneal dialysis performed less well than those
that did not. There were significant frailty effects among centers, with relative
risks varying between 0.24 and 3.15, and an estimated variance of 0.43.
CONCLUSIONS: Routine assessment based on health registries of the outcome of any 
high technology medical treatment is extremely important in maintaining quality
of care and in estimating the impact of changes in therapies, units, and patient 
profiles. The frailty model allowed estimation of variation in risk between
centers not attributable to any measured covariates. This can be used to guide
more specific investigation and changes in health policies related to renal
transplant therapies.


PMID: 12803346  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
